APPENDIX II




THE EXPEDITION HUTS AT McMURDO SOUND


By SIR E. H. SHACKLETON

The following notes are designed for the benefit of future explorers
who may make McMurdo Sound a base for inland operations, and to clear
any inaccuracies or ambiguities concerning the history, occupation, and
state of these huts.

(1) THE NATIONAL ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION’S HUT AT HUT POINT—THE HEAD OF
McMURDO SOUND


This hut was constructed by Captain Scott in 1902, by the Expedition
sent out by the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Society, the
Government, and by private subscription. Captain Robert F. Scott was
appointed to the command of the Expedition. I served as Third
Lieutenant until February 1903, when I was invalided home through a
broken blood vessel in the lungs, the direct result of scurvy
contracted on the Southern journey. The _Discovery_ hut was a large
strong building, but was so draughty and cold in comparison with the
ship, which was moored one hundred yards away, that it was, during the
first year, never used for living quarters. Its sole use was as a
storehouse, and a large supply of rough stores, such as flour, cocoa,
coffee, biscuit, and tinned meat, was left there in the event of its
being used as a place of retreat should any disaster overtake the ship.
During the second year occasional parties camped inside the hut, but no
bunks or permanent sleeping quarters were ever erected. The discomfort
of the hut was a byword on the Expedition, but it formed an excellent
depot and starting-point for all parties proceeding to the south.

When the _Discovery_ finally left McMurdo Sound, the hut was stripped
of all gear, including the stove, but there was left behind a large
depot of the stores mentioned above. I was not aware of this until I
returned to McMurdo Sound in February 1908, when I sent Adams, Joyce,
and Wild across to the hut whilst the _Nimrod_ was lying off the ice.

On the return of the party they reported that the door had been burst
open, evidently by a southerly blizzard, and was jammed by snow outside
and in, so they made an entrance through one of the lee windows. They
found the hut practically clear of snow, and the structure quite
intact. I used the hut in the spring, _i.e._ September and October
1908, as a storehouse for the large amount of equipment, food, and oil
that we were to take on the Southern journey. We built a sort of
living-room out of the cases of provisions, and swept out the debris.
The Southern Party elected to sleep there before the start, but the
supporting party slept outside in the tents, as they considered it
warmer.

We still continued to use the lee window as means of ingress and egress
to avoid continual shovelling away of the snow, which would be
necessary as every southerly blizzard blocked up the main entrance. The
various depot parties made use of the hut for replenishing their
stores, which had been sledged from my own hut to Hut Point. On the
night of March 3, 1909, I arrived with the Southern Party, with a sick
man, having been absent on the march 128 days. Our position was bad, as
the ship was north of us. We tried to burn the Magnetic Hut in the hope
of attracting attention from the ship, but were not able to get it to
light. We finally managed to light a flare of carbide, and the ship
came down to us in a blizzard, and all were safely aboard at 1 a.m. on
March 4, 1909. Before leaving the hut we jammed the window up with
baulks of timber, to the best of our ability, in the storm and
darkness. The hut was used again by the Ross Sea Section of this last
Expedition. The snow was cleared out and extra stores were placed in
it. From reports I have received the _Discovery_ Hut was in as good
condition in 1917 as it was in 1902.

The stores placed there in 1902 are intact. There are a few cases of
extra provisions and oil in the hut, but no sleeping gear, or
accommodation, nor stoves, and it must not be looked upon as anything
else than a shelter and a most useful _pied-à-terre_ for the start of
any Southern journey. No stores nor any equipment have been taken from
it during either of my two Expeditions.

(2) CAPE ROYDS HUT


For several reasons, when I went into McMurdo Sound in 1908 in command
of my own Expedition, known as the British Antarctic Expedition, after
having failed to land on King Edward VII Land, I decided to build our
hut at Cape Royds—a small promontory twenty-three miles north of Hut
Point. Here the whole shore party lived in comfort through the winter
of 1908. When spring came stores were sledged to Hut Point, so that
should the sea-ice break up early between these two places we might not
be left in an awkward position. After the return of the Southern Party
we went direct north to civilization, so I never visited my hut again.
I had left, however, full instructions with Professor David as to the
care of the hut, and before the whole Expedition left, the hut was put
in order. A letter was pinned in a conspicuous place inside, stating
that there were sufficient provisions and equipment to last fifteen men
for one year, indicating also the details of these provisions and the
position of the coal store. The stove was in good condition, and the
letter ended with an invitation for any succeeding party to make what
use they required of stores and hut. The hut was then locked and the
key nailed on the door in a conspicuous place. From the report of
Captain Scott’s last Expedition the hut was in good condition, and from
a still later report from the Ross Sea side of this present Expedition,
the hut was still intact.

(3) CAPE EVANS HUT


This large and commodious hut was constructed by Captain Scott at Cape
Evans on his last Expedition. The party lived in it in comfort, and it
was left well supplied with stores in the way of food and oil, and a
certain amount of coal. Several of the scientific staff of this present
Expedition were ashore in it, when the _Aurora_, which was to have been
the permanent winter quarters, broke adrift in May 1915, and went north
with the ice. The hut became the permanent living quarters for the ten
marooned men, and thanks to the stores they were able to sustain life
in comparative comfort, supplementing these stores from my hut at Cape
Royds. In January 1917, after I had rescued the survivors, I had the
hut put in order and locked up.

To sum up, there are three available huts in McMurdo Sound.

(a) The _Discovery_ Hut with a certain amount of rough stores, and only
of use as a point of departure for the South.

(b) Cape Royds Hut with a large amount of general stores, but no
clothing or equipment now.

(c) Cape Evans Hut with a large amount of stores, but no clothing or
equipment and only a few sledges.

(4) DEPOTS SOUTH OF HUT POINT


In spite of the fact that several depots have been laid to the south of
Hut Point on the Barrier, the last being at the Gap (the entrance to
the Beardmore Glacier), no future Expedition should depend on them as
the heavy snowfall obliterates them completely. There is no record of
the depots of any Expedition being made use of by any subsequent
Expedition. No party in any of my Expeditions has used any depot laid
down by a previous Expedition.


[Illustration: The Voyage of the _Endurance_]
